Patrick:
Okay, we'll be discussing the writing of-
on how to write DeafBlind, we'll be discussing
the definitions of Deaf, Blind, and DeafBlind.
And we'll be discussing the demographics of
the census of DeafBlind, for what the population
is of DeafBlind within the United States.
We'll also be discussing the causes and types
of DeafBlindness.
Also communication methods as well as early
intervention, education, recreation, technology,
and services.
Kathy:
Support!
Patrick:
Oh, and orientation to mobility.
Okay, writing the DeafBlind word.
In the DeafBlind community it is preferred
to being the first one: D-e-a-f-B-l-i-n-d,
as it is considered one word.
But for me, I prefer it to type it as "Deaf-Blind"
because it is more grammatically correct as
with a hyphen.
It is the conjunction of two words that will
conjoin the two words to make it one.
D-e-a-f-B-l-i-n-d will be two separate disabilities.
As you will see, you can also find it as Blind-Deaf.
This would be in the case of somebody who
is born blind first and then deaf.
I would be "Blind-Deaf" but I don't find it
in the flow of words in the English language.
So I still use DeafBlind.
But the most challenged is "Deaf/Blind"...
This one is considered as "Deaf and Blind"
or "Deaf or Blind" So it would be considered
two disabilities.
Deafness.
As you as you will find in a dictionary, it
is the general definition: hard of hearing
or completely or partially unable to hear
in one or both ears.
Medically speaking, it's the definition that
scientists and medical
personnel will use.
The definition in medically speaking is the
condition in
which you have the lack of sensitivity of
sound.
When you see the
word spelled as "deaf" lowercase D it is the
audiological
experience of the inability to sense sound.
And finally legally speaking: legally speaking
it's when it is
relating to the law.
This term is what we use when you would find
in the
registry of the state for the United States
Census when legally speaking it
is the degree of hearing loss.
[Tara murmurs, inaudible]
Patrick:
Hold on!
Tara:
My bad!
[Laughter]
Patrick:
I'll explain what that means in one minute.
Okay, degree of hearing loss.
A person with perfect hearing will be less
than ten decibels.
A person with mild deafness will hear between
-
Tara, softly:
Greater than.
Patrick:
Greater than?
Oops.
I meant to ask you that.
I can't remember which direction it is.
If you see it that way, I'm writing it was
less than, and when it's the other way, I
write it as greater than.
Tara:
Oh, okay.
Less than looks like what?
Audience:
An L!
Tara:
It looks like an L.
Patrick:
Okay.
[Laughter]
So it looks like an L?
You mean it points to the other direction.
I've always known it as alligator points to
it.
Tara:
Oh yeah that's confusing.
Patrick:
So Mild deafness would be from 10 decibels
to 30 decibels of sound.
While Moderate will be 30 to 60 decibels of
sound.
You also have Severe which is 60 to 90 decibels
of sound.
And you have Profound, which is 90 to over
120 decibels of sound.
Moderate and Severe are considered hard of
hearing, while Profound is almost totally
deaf.
Tara:
What I think that means is that it's less
than -
Patrick:
In my right ear, I am Moderate to Severe,
and my left ear Severe to Profound.
The degree of hearing loss is determined by
an audiogram.
Uhh, I need the mouse here.
Tara:
Want me to do it?
Patrick:
I'll give you a demonstration of what the
sound of what
hearing loss would be.
Can you click yes please?
Can you click the first one?
Click here first.
Tara:
He can't see the mouse.
He only knows there's a screen up there.
He's not really reading anything off of the
screen.
Automated Male Voice:
By listening to the hearing loss samples from
this
presentation you will hear what it's like
to have a variety of different
hearing losses.
Before starting it's probably a good idea
to adjust the
intensity of my voice to a comfortable listening
level.
This program is best heard using a computer
with a good external speaker system or quality
ear phones.
To hear the samples simply click your mouse
on the corresponding buttons.
Tara:
Normal hearing, right, this normal.
Automated Voice:
this is a representation of normal conversational
speech.
Assuming that you have normal hearing and
a good sound system with your computer you
should
have no trouble hearing a broad spectrum of
speech sounds.
Tara:
This is normal, right?
This is mild.
If you had a mild hearing loss, this is what
you would hear.
[Automated Voice continues in the background,
and is indistinguishable]
Tara:
It's harder to hear, correct?
Now this is mild high frequency loss.
Automated Voice:
This is an example of high frequency hearing
loss often sound in people who have been exposed
to noise.
The quality of my speech is slightly muffled
especially for high frequency sounds like
TTHH and SHHHH.
Tara:
Do you see it's like that, that's damage hearing
loss from like using
machines or -
Kathy:
Sitting in cars with loud ka-booms, iPods,
earphones in your ears all the time, going
to concerts...
[Automated Voice continues in the background,
and is indistinguishable]
Tara:
This is high frequency loss.
[Automated Voice continues in the background,
and is indistinguishable]
Tara:
It's hard to understand high frequency sounds.
This is when someone talks and there, there's
all this background noise.
And this is what hearing aids normally do
for people and like Patrick when he when he's
trying to hear somebody and there's background
noise he
almost can't hear anything.
Listen, this is what it sounds like.
Automated Male Voice:
In the sample you will hear my voice in the
presence of background noise.
[Automated Voice plays in the background,
with loud various background noise making
speech indistinguishable]
Tara:
See how hard he is to understand?
[Automated Voice continues in the background,
and is indistinguishable]
Tara:
That's when he usually shuts the hearing aids
off because he can't hear anyway.
Kathy:
Just because the hearing aid picks up the
sound going in the ear, it doesn't distinguish
where it's coming from.
[Automated Voice plays a new clip with the
speech distorted and indistinguishable]
Tara:
And Distorted Speech Hearing Loss.
Okay.
Patrick:
Okay...
Blindness.
Generally speaking, it's being unable to see
for the lack of perception
of light will form due to psychological or
physiological factors.
Medically speaking you would have, when terms
are medically speaking, someone with total
blindness would have the inability to see
either light or form and it is called on the
paperwork NLP which mean s No Light Perception.
What's the top?
Blindness would be – Legal Blindness?
In the United States and Europe when you are
classified
as legal blindness you have 20...
20/200 vision or less.
Well vision is between 20/70 and 20/200.
And 10% of those classified as legal blind,
legally blind are totally blind.
And umm 80% of those with legal blindness
have some vision.
By the World Health Organization's International
statistical classification, of the tenth revision,
what's the top one again?
Well vision is between, is less than 3/18,
but more than or equal to 3/60.
Total blindness - I mean, any visual field
is less than 20
degrees of how much that you can see in the
visual field.
Uhh, blindness will be - Let me start over.
Tara:
Oh here it goes.
"A normal-" no, nope.
No, it's not – it's, I don't know.
Patrick:
It's not supposed to go automatically.
Tara:
I don't know, how do you stop it?
Patrick:
I don't know, I have it on set on animation.
Kathy, ruefully:
Technology.
Patrick:
Ummm, Kathy?
Tara:
Kathy?
[laughter]
Kathy:
Hit escape!
Tara:
Okay!
Patrick:
Say an individual, you are classified as DeafBlind.
If you are classified as DeafBlind medically,
you would be able to receive special education
services from the schools.
Types of DeafBlindness.
These are disorders that have DeafBlind exclusively.
Usher Syndrome, which is Retinitis Pigmentosa
of the blindness with a form of hearing loss.
Usher Syndrome has 3 types and is a genetic
disorder.
When you have Type 1, you are born Deaf and
have tunnel vision at, at childhood.
Type 2, you are born hard of hearing and will
receive your Retinitis Pigmentosa or "RP"
in your teenage years.
RP is tunnel vision and night blindness.
And number - Type 3 will be the uh, you would
receive – you were born with good hearing
but will later progress with hard of hearing
later in life.
And in most cases, RP does not show until
around early adulthood.
Type 1 and 2 is approximately 2.4% of the
entire Deaf population within the United States.
Demographics for the Census of the population
of DeafBlindness.
Within the state of North Carolina approximately
700 people have been classified as DeafBlind
within the National Registry of DeafBlindness.
This national registry is not the statistical
information, rather
it is voluntary.
But according to the Division of Services
for the Blind there is approximately 900.
Within the United States alone there is approximately...
umm
according to the Children's Census by the
National Technical Assistance Consortium for
those who are DeafBlind Youths and Children
there's up to 2005 Census is 10,000.
Adding to that, from ages birth to 21 and
going on to age 80, that would equal about
40,000 people.
With the demographics of the Deaf population
at 2.4% that would equal around 30,000 with
Usher Syndrome which will bring to the census
of 70,000.
We do not know the exact population of the
Deaf, of those who are DeafBlind worldwide
as in the national registry but there may
be some sources internationally.
In September there's an international conference
on DeafBlindness.
What causes DeafBlindness?
It can be genetic, congenital, or acquired.
Genetic is something like Usher Syndrome.
Congenital would be similar to something like
Congenital Rubella Syndrome.
In 1964 there was the Rubella Epidemic in
which many people within the United States
and worldwide received Rubella through birth
and were affected while still living.
You - If the mother is infected with Rubella
or the German Measles, the child, while she
is pregnant, can receive Congenital Rubella
Syndrome.
And in some cases, C.R.S. which is the abbreviation
for Congenital Rubella Syndrome, they are
DeafBlind.
Yes?
… Pardon me?
No.
[Patrick and Tara speak softly, speech is
indistinguishable]
Patrick:
Measles... no, she had ill fever.
Umm, Acquired.
If you had similar to what Helen Keller had,
was a high fever.
So she became Deaf and Blind while in sickness.
So when she recovered she had no vision or
hearing.
And, I got them all there.
Okay, okay.
The Americans With Disabilities Act was enacted
in 1990 but not officially done until 1991.
This act provides accessibility and the protection
of DeafBlind-I mean, not DeafBlind but all
persons of disabilities.
The Individuals with Disabilities Educational
Act or the I.D.E.A. was first established
in 2001 by Congress, and was revised in 2004.
This law provides the provision of an I.E.P.
for Individualized Educational Plan for persons
with disabilities.
Section 504 is the Civil Rights Law for those
In Section 508 it's the law that provides,
that calls for the provision of accessible
access on the internet for persons with disabilities
Communications?
Okay.
American Sign Language, Communication Cards,
writing back and forth, print on palm, emergency
electronic, and Braille..
American Sign Language is the official sign
language of American Culture for sign language.
Each country has their own sign language.
In the United States, there are actually three
structures.
American Sign Language, which is their own
language.
Pidgin Sign English would use American Signs
but will be in the English structure of grammar.
And Signed Exact English is every single word
in the English Language, for word for word.
For example, in ASL the word "the" does not
exist, nor does the word "and."
Tara:
The word "THE"… umm, what do you do?
Do you do ASL?
Patrick:
ASL?
I'm not ASL yet, but I'll be studying ASL
2 at Central
Piedmont Community College in the fall.
Tara:
What do you do?
Patrick:
I use Pidgin Signs.
Tara:
What's that?
Patrick:
ASL Signs but its, I mean, ASL has its own
grammar just like English has its own grammar.
So we would use in Pidgin Sign, ASL signs
but in English sentence.
So, if I was to do the Pledge of Allegiance
in ASL, I wouldn't use the word "the," "of,"
and such.
I think I'll do a demonstration.
"I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United
States of America.
To the Republic for which is stands, one nation
under God, indivisible with Liberty, Justice
for all."
That was ASL.
But if was to do it in Pidgin Sign or Signed
Exact English, it would be:
"I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United
States of America.
And to the Republic for which is stands, one
nation under God, with Liberty and Justice
(or Justice) for all (or all)."
Communication Cards.
Tara:
This is how he communicates by the way.
Patrick:
Some DeafBlind cannot speak for themselves
because they do not have enough voice skills
or speaking skills, so they would have cards
that will tell the other hearing person what
they are trying to say.
It's not in there, I just need to reach across
the card.
Tara:
Okay.
Patrick:
The umm... but I would have a card and someone
would tell me what it says.
Like, I have umm for the Charlotte Transit
setting system I have a
card that would tell me what bus I'm on.
One method would be for someone to write on
a laminated sheet of paper with dry erase,
a notepad, or a whiteboard.
Mrs. Costenoble is going to write something
to see what I would see what I can say.
Okay....
"Good job!"
[laughter]
Or some people – where is it?
Or some people with electronic communication
would be able to use communication.
Tara:
Is it on?
Patrick:
This PacMate is a keyboard which has a Braille
display on the bottom.
So Mrs. Costenoble might write something.
Tara:
Oops.
But you can't tell what you're writing.
Seeing people can.
Patrick:
Okay.
So Mrs. Costenoble has written "How I-"
Tara:
Oops!
I messed up!
Patrick:
Excuse me.
"How I sth-"
Tara:
Erase!
I'll fix it, I'll write it.
Okay, erase it!
Erase, erase!
[Laughter]
Patrick, laughing:
Okay.
Tara:
Okay now.
Patrick:
The problem with the PacMate is that you can't
see what you're writing.
But there are other technologies.
Such as the DeafBlind Communicator.
Let's see what she's got.
"How is the weather?"
Hmmm, I don't know!
[laughter]
The DeafBlind Communicator was invented in
Denmark.
You would have – it's an un-foldable case
of leather.
Like she would have the keyboard to her, and
I would have the braille display on my side
and it would be visual side for that person
to see.
It would work for the musicians!
Ummm, Recreation and Sports.
The Deaf and Blind community have their own
coachable teams.
The Southeast Association of the Deaf has
their own basketball tournament.
And in October I went to the North Carolina
School for the Deaf Homecoming which uhh football
which competed against Ohio School for the
Deaf.
And NCSD won!
They also have their own camps as well.
The Blind community has their own sports.
It is actually another version of the sport
that visual people would play.
GoalBall is the blind version of soccer while
Beep Baseball is the Blind's version of baseball.
They're actually different from the other
two because GoalBall [cough] I haven't talked
this much in -
[Laughter]
Tara:
He's like, "I haven't talked this much..."
You have to...
Patrick:
Okay.
GoalBall – eh, I'll wait 'til I get to pictures
to explain it.
And what was the last one?
Tara:
Beep.
Patrick:
Oh, okay.
Judo.
Hey, the picture didn't come up.
Tara:
I don't know.
Oh well.
No, I saw the pictures already.
There's a picture of him in his Karate uniform
and stuff and...
Patrick:
Alright.
Tara:
Oh there they are, there they go!
There's a picture of him running, I don't
know, it went fast.
Kathy:
What is up with the-?
Patrick:
No it was set so each picture was supposed
to show up with it.
Tara:
Just do it again, do it again.
Look quick again.
Not all of them are of Patrick.
That was a picture of Patrick in the green
shirt.
Go again, one more time.
There's Patrick!
In the green shirt he's running.
Anyway, keep going, keep going.
Patrick:
Okay.
The Karate picture that you saw was when I
received my yellow belt.
I cannot find my black belt picture right
now so I just used the yellow belt.
Umm, let me go back.
The picture was too fast to show, but in Beep
Baseball there are only two bases.
And the bases are ummm towers so when you
hit the bat with the T, the base will beep.
And GoalBall there are only 3 players per
team: center, left and right.
And in both sports, you have to use blindfolds
so I suppose a visual person would be able
to play as well.
Tara:
Okay.
There's gonna be pictures again but I guess
they're gonna come back.
There they go!
Audience:
Bowling!
Tara:
Oh, did you say what you got at bowling?
Patrick:
Bowling?
Tara:
Yeah, your score.
Patrick:
Score?
Tara:
What was your score, do you remember?
Patrick:
No, I don't remember!
I-
Tara:
It was like a 140-something.
I said, "Well Mom, he had the bumpers," and
she said "No, he didn’t!"
You guys all played bowling the other day
and some of you didn't even break 100.
Kathy:
Shame on us!
[Laughter, Audience talking in the background
about their bowling scores.]
Patrick:
Not gonna show it again.
Tara:
This is his Brailler.
Patrick:
It's going too fast for these too.
Tara:
Try to look quickly for his Brailler writer.
Looks like an old-fashioned type writer but
it's a Brailler.
Okay, go ahead... the first picture!
There it is.
Okay do it again.
Ready?
Fist one.
That's a Brailler.
See that big hunk of metal?
That has 6 keys.
And that's what Brailles on 'em.
Patrick:
The, the first picture you saw was a Perkins
Brailler.
You may have seen 9 keys but there are only
6 keys that produce Braille cells.
The next picture is the Romeo Embosser, Juliet
and Tiger.
Tara:
Did you say Romeo and Juliet?
Patrick:
Or Romeo and Juliet!
Well, my school had a Romeo and my friend's
school had a Juliet!
But they're Braille printers.
And you have a PacMate which I just demonstrated,
which also comes in the form of the, the type
of keyboard that the Brailler showed.
Tara:
That's what a Brailler looks like.
That's how many keys a Brailler has.
Patrick:
Which picture is that?
Tara:
It's the Brailler.
Patrick
That's the Brailler?
Oh, it goes backwards I guess.
Okay, now we have... okay.
We have umm, CCTV's or ClosedCircuit Televisions.
Not close captioned.
That is an Optelec Clearview which is similar
to the one that I have at home.
The one I have at school is called a Merlin
– Oh, and I mean Arthurian Legends.
And this is called an Amigo.
I use it over the paper and you can tilt it.
There are many colors and they have different
shapes.
Tara:
This, this you guys see -
Patrick:
Hearing Aids, FM systems, Loop systems and
speaker systems.
FM systems is what I'm using now to control
my voice, but mostly is given to another speaker
to hear.
It will tranmit the voice directly to my hearing
aids.
A loop system is a system if your hearing
aid has telecoil which is what hard of hearing
people use to hear on the phone.
And the room is wired with electromagnetic
cable, you'll be able to pick up the sound.
There are also other systems that you can
use to loop around your neck.
Tara:
He has hearing aids.
And what Stephan has is a "cogular" implant.
Kathy:
"Cochlear."
Stephan corrected you by the way.
Tara:
Cochlear!
Sorry!
Student 1:
Stephan it's a Cochlear implant?
Kathy:
"Cochlear implant"
Tara:
I can't get this up.
Patrick:
Okay.
[Patrick and Tara speaking softly]
Tara:
Okay.
Patrick:
I'm on the corner of the street.
I have my street crossing card in display
like this, and my cane in display.
Or it might be this way, as long as the cars
will be able to see it.
Now...Oh, okay.
Now I cross the street.
Okay.
Ummm.
Tara:
So I come along and help him cross.
Patrick:
Guiding is what I just demonstrated.
But some people sign to me at the same time.
I would use Guiding like this: walk and sign
at the same time instead of doing it this
way.
And guide dogs.
There are only 2 organizations within the
United States that show – oh.
Patrick:
This is a normal display.
Tara:
Okay, try it again.
Patrick:
Show them normal...
Tara:
This is normal display, this is what you see
every day, right?
Okay go ahead.
Patrick:
Okay.
Kathy:
Mrs. Stork.
Mrs. Stork!
He's going for dismissal.
Tara:
This is what he has -
Patrick:
Let me umm start a Word Document.
Tara:
Do you see how big it has to be for him to
see?
That's the mouse!
[Audience wows in the background]
Patrick:
Let's start it.
Tara:
Okay I'm going to type something.
Do you want me to type something?
Patrick:
Okay, type something.
Tara:
Okay.
See how the background went black?
Okay, the background is -
Patrick:
And it'll be about this big and I have to
be this close.
Tara:
He has to be about that close to read it still.
Patrick:
"How are you?"
Tara:
But at least he can read it, right?
Patrick:
Okay.
Now, guide dogs.
Street crossing...
Vibrotactile signals.
In Charlotte there are Vibrotactile signals.
If you were in Charlotte you may have noticed
limited poles that are beeping and also talking
telling you that it's safe that tell you when
it's safe to cross.
If you put your hand on that box it will vibrate
when it's safe to cross.
Tara:
So in Charlotte they have these and you can
touch it and feel that it's safe to cross,
okay?
Patrick:
Support Serice Providers.
In the United States they're called SSPs.
But in Canada, England, and Australia they
are called Interveners.
They act as guides, and volunteering interpreters.
Kathy:
They're called what?
Patrick:
There is congressional legislation right now
going on to try to provide the money to train
SSPs.
Patrick:
They're interveners...
They're high beeps.
Tara:
He only hears bass.
So you really feel it.
Patrick:
At this time, I have my sterio up on the third-floor
blaring music and down on teh first floor
but everyone's complaining it's too loud.
[laughter]
Tara:
Okay.
Any other questions?
Will J!
Will J:
With the street signs, when do you know it's
safe?
Tara:
...Street signs, when do you know it's safe?
Patrick:
You mean Vibrotactile?
Tara:
You mean if it doesn't have one of those beepers?
Patrick:
While there's a street crossing on 95th Ave
I mean Elizabeth avenue and Independence Avenue
in Charlotte there's Central Piedmont Community
College.
While I can tell it's safe to cross by the
traffic light and Vibrotactile, I can't tell
if it's safe if the car is gonna turn or not
because I can't see across the street.
I can only cross a two-lane street safety.
Tara:
He can only cross one, you now, if it has
one lane, but if there's two lanes he can't
cross and he only knows because he can feel
the vibration.
Desmond?
Desmond:
How old are you?
Patrick:
I just turned 20.
Tara:
He just turned 20.
[laughter]
Shane:
Has he ever broken a board in karate?
[Audience talking quietly]
Tara:
No, he hasn’t.
Patrick:
I haven't done sparing but I have done self-defense
techniques.
Tara:
Mallory!
Mallory:
If you have the pass on the street, and what
if no body helps you?
What happens?
Patrick:
Well that is a scenario I had a problem with.
At a cross road, sometimes I have to wait,
wait, wait.
Because the cars - sometimes the cars will
go right by, they won't stop.
There's a law in North Carolina that you're
supposed to stop at least 15 feet away from
the crossroads but I can't see that far.
Well, I can see the cars there but I can't
tell if it stopped.
So I'm just waiting.
Tara:
So he has to wait a long time until someone
comes.
Yes?
Student 1:
Okay so when, like I saw him typing on his
computer, how does he know how to make the
sentences are together?
Tara:
Like how does he see it?
Ummm he knows like, he knows the keyboard
but how do you know what you're typing?
Patrick:
Well I usually can type without even looking.
The other day, wait, it was last Thursday.
My English class was supposed to be doing
a presentation but my teacher set up a prompt
for the beginning of class but I didn't set
up my laptop -